---
replying_to: '6'
id: comment-1168300703
date: 2013-12-18T03:20:44Z
updated: 2013-12-18T03:20:44Z
_parent: /work/hpstr-jekyll-theme/
name: Michael Rose
url: https://mademistakes.com/
email: 1ce71bc10b86565464b612093d89707e
---

Thanks man!

Changing the the font-size on the .highlight class in `pygments.less` should
have worked but I just noticed that I put a font-size on the pre element, and
because of how the cascade works that size is overriding the one you set on
`.highlight`.

If you edit the pre element's font-size in `typography.less` on line 132 you
should be all set.

I bounce back between Windows and Mac OS X and noticed the same error when I was
running grunt on a Windows 7 setup. If I remember correctly when you run
`npm install` from the CLI a few dependencies for `grunt-contrib-imagemin` don't
install properly and that's what the ENOENT error is referring to.

I think the fix was to add a line to the `package.json` file to install an older
`jpegtran-bin` dependency that will actually compile on a Windows 7 machine. If
you add

`"jpegtran-bin": "0.2.0"` to devDependencies in `package.json` and then run
`npm install` see if everything installs properly for `grunt-contrib-imagemin`
and then try running grunt again. You might have to dump your `node_modules`
folder first before running `npm install`, I'm not sure.

If imagemin still doesn't work you could always use `grunt-imgcompress` instead
and modify the grunt tasks or just remove it all together. That's what I'm using
on this site (see my Made Mistakes repo to lift the grunt tasks).

Let me know how it goes and if you hit any other hiccups.
