---
_id: ec2cdc70-7207-11e7-a45a-3114f0323905
_parent: /articles/improving-jekyll-static-comments/
name: Gonzalo Ziadi
email: 84028d1c4d05a0a226a38be5e72803dd
url: 'http://www.windespair.com'
replying_to: ''
hidden: ''
date: '2017-07-26T13:40:01.764Z'
---

Michael, thanks a ton for this post! I used it as the base for my own
implementation. Some things I
had to change:

- `"item.replying_to == ''"` rather than `"item.replying_to == blank"`
- `{% assign comments = site.data.comments[page.slug] | where_exp:"item", "item.replying_to == ''" | sort: 'date' %}`
  rather than
  `{% assign comments = site.data.comments[page.slug] | where_exp:"item", "item.replying_to == blank" %}`
  as even though I followed your comment naming convention, posts were being
  sorted in reverse alphabetical order so the replies were showing under the
  wrong parent comment. Now that I think about it maybe | reverse would work the
  same as | sort `date` in my case.

I also tried to use the comment `_id` field as the "link" between child and
parent rather than the for loop index, but I kept getting errors about 'nesting
too deep'. I feel like using the `_id` field would be better though as then
sorting the comments by date or some other parameter would become doable. What
do you think?

- I didn't want to use jQuery so I changed a bit how the replies work. Same
  concept, different implementation.
- I changed the CSS a little, but it is heavily inspired by yours.
- I changed the website input type to text instead of url. The url regex is
  annoying, to me, as it requires users to put the http:// in front of their
  url. I feel like they shouldn't have to do this.

If it piques your curiosity in the very least, in my `_includes` folder I have
your same three files (comments, comment, and comment-form) and in my `_layouts`
folder in `default.html` in a script tag at the bottom of the file I have the js
code for the replies. Thanks again!"
