---
_id: comment-2311995389
_parent: /articles/ipad-pro/
date: 2015-10-17T13:10:52Z
updated: 2015-10-17T13:10:52Z
name: Jay Versluis
url: ''
avatar: https://disqus.com/api/users/avatars/jayversluis.jpg
---

Let me be that inner artist in you and give it to you straight: yes, you're
going to get an iPad Pro on Launch Day, and yes, you're going to have the time
of your life with it. You're too curious and way too talented to pass this
opportunity up. All those thoughts about _it's too expensive, it's too beta,
it's too unnecessary_ - they will all go away moments after you start playing
with Apple Pencil. Trust your gut instinct on this.

Ask yourself, have you ever regretted the iPad Air 2 purchase? Was your previous
iPad not good enough when you had it? Or the purchase of that new iPhone when
the old one was still packing a good punch? You will love the iPad Pro, and it
will be an investment into yourself as an artist. It's the tablet you've we been
waiting for. Why wait longer? There's always _a better device coming soon_, but
with that attitude, you'll be forever waiting and not creating. And that's just
not you.

If you're not sure about it, buy it on launch day anyway and return it within 2
weeks. They'll give you a full refund and won't ask questions. That will be a
much bigger challenge, one you will pass easily if you feel the technology just
isn't there yet. Without buying it, and thoroughly testing it, you'll never know
what it's like to use the iPad Pro and Apple Pencil. Besides, you'll get a good
blog post out of it too ;-)

PS: I'm not working for Apple, and I don't get a commission when you buy the
iPad Pro.
